Add ADR for using AI Verify for running technical tests (#160)
MinBZK/ai-validation: docs/projects/tad/adrs/0005-ai-verify-technical-tests.md

# TAD-0005 Use AI Verify for technical tests

## Context

> The AI Verify project is set up in a modular way, and the technical tests is one of the modules. The AI Verify

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [AI Verify project](https://github.com/aiverify-foundation/aiverify) is set up in a modular way, and the technical tests is one of the modules. The AI Verify
```

team is developing a feature which makes it possible to run the technical tests using an API, by using

> a python file calling a method to run a test and providing the required configuration, like which
> model and dataset to use and some test specific configuration. The result of the test are returned in a JSON format,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a Python file calling a method to run a test and providing the required configuration; for example, which
model and dataset to use and some test specific configuration. The result of the test are returned in a JSON format,
```

> which can be processed as we want, like write it to a file or store it in a database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which can be processed as we want, like write it to a file or store it in a database or System Card.
```

> which can be processed as we want, like write it to a file or store it in a database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which can be processed as in any way as we please, like writing it it to a file or System Card or store it in a database.
```

### Pros

> * We have several technical tests we can use of the shelf.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We have several technical tests we can use of the shelf, like SHAP, ALE, or Fairness metrics.
```

* Tests are set up in a generic way using interfaces which allows others, like ourselves, to create their own plugins.
* Loading models, pipelines and data is done through the AI Verify toolkit, which does validation

>  and support checks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 and support checks. All of these should adhere to a specific format, which one should be aware of.
```

### Cons

> * The result of a test is dependent on how AI Verify has implemented it.

Reviewer 3: perhaps we can be more specific here and name that we have less flexibility in what is logged into the process report and what is written into the result report.

> * Adding our own plugins may require adding AI Verify front end blocks we don't use ourselves.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Adding our own plugins may require adding AI Verify frontend blocks we don't use ourselves.
```

* We are dependent on the AI Verify ecosystem for supported models and data formats.

## Assumptions

> * We can wrap the API and other AI Verify requirements in a docker image.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* We can wrap the API and other AI Verify requirements in a Docker image.
```

> * We can run the docker image independently where we only have to provide the model, datasets and other

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* We can run the Docker image independently where we only have to provide the model, datasets and other
```

 required configuration to run a test.

## Decision

We will use the technical tests of AI Verify for the TAD tool.

## Risks

> We are tied to the AI Verify ecosystem.

Reviewer: We are not fully tied to the AI verify ecosystem, just for specific technical tests. Probably if tests are missing we should maybe write our own wrapper for them if we don't want to immediately make a AIVerify Plugin

Author: True. What this intended to state, as ecosystem, is that besides the tests, we also require the test-engine-core etc. modules. So, to load a model or data, we depend on if / how AI-Verify has implemented this. I will make that more clear.

## Consequences

> We have a set of technical tests we can integrate in the TAD tool.

Reviewer: :)

# TAD-0005 Use AI Verify for technical tests

## Context

The [AI Verify project](https://github.com/aiverify-foundation/aiverify) is set up in a modular way, and the
technical tests is one of the modules. The AI Verify

> team is developing a feature which makes it possible to run the technical tests using an API, by using
> a Python file calling a method to run a test and providing the required configuration; for example, which

Reviewer 4: Is the following still correct?

```suggestion
team is developing a feature which makes it possible to run the technical tests using an API: a python library with a method to run a test and providing the required configuration; for example, which
```

model and dataset to use and some test specific configuration. The result of the test are returned in a JSON format,
which can be processed in any way we please, like writing it to a file or System Card or store it in a database.

### Pros

* We have several technical tests we can use of the shelf, like SHAP, ALE, or Fairness metrics.
* Tests are set up in a generic way using interfaces which allows others, like ourselves, to create their own plugins.
* Loading models, pipelines and data is done through the AI Verify toolkit, which does validation
 and support checks. All of these should adhere to a specific format, which one should be aware of.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* We benefit from new tests being added in the future
* We contribute tests that others would use

```

### Cons

* The outcome of an AI Verify test depends on the implementation chosen by the tool's developers. This means
 there's less control over what data goes into the process report compared to the final result report.

> * Adding our own plugins may require adding AI Verify frontend blocks we don't use ourselves.

Reviewer 4: What do we mean bij this?

Author: Test from AI Verify consist of a "run the test" part (producing JSON), and "support and visualization" components (react components) for use in AI Verify's own UI tool, see https://aiverify-foundation.github.io/aiverify-developer-tools/plugins/widget/Plugin/.

> * We are dependent on the AI Verify ecosystem for supported models and data formats.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* We are dependent on the AI Verify ecosystem for supported models and data formats. However, they are (like us) planning to expand model support to also include ONNX
```

> ## Assumptions

Reviewer 4: Did we verify any of these assumptions?

Author: Indirectly yes. We have ran AI Verify in a docker, we have seen the progress being called (it's a method that now prints the progress but we can add any logic we require). The output is a JSON file which we can use. So, basically, yes, but we "haven't build it yet".

* We can wrap the API and other AI Verify requirements in a Docker image.
* We can run the Docker image independently where we only have to provide the model, datasets and other
 required configuration to run a test.
* We can monitor the progress of a test in our TAD tool.
* We can process the results of a test in our TAD tool.

## Decision

> We will use the technical tests of AI Verify for the TAD tool.

Reviewer 5: For me the loss in flexibility is not balanced out by the advantages. But if you think this is the way. its fine by me.

Reviewer: I would add the added nuance that we try to use AI Verify as much as possible for Technical tests as this forces us to standardize the models and the datasets in their format and make use of an international library, but of course not always it will be possible and then we will build our own workarounds for it

Author: I changed the decision to: Our technical tests will include, but may extend beyond, those offered by AI Verify.

@berrydenhartog It is (now) stated we won't only use AI-Verify, which implies and means we *can* add other tests or solutions. AI Verify offers a strong base, with model loading (and validation), data loading (and validation), and running (several) technical tests "as is", almost "plug and play", with a clear Interface and modular approach which allows for adding "our own". Again, we are not limited, but hopefully "launched" by using what is offered.

Reviewer 4: Good to add this nuance, it is exactly what I had in mind, but it wasn't explicit yet.

> # TAD-0005 Use AI Verify for technical tests

Reviewer 6: What do you think of renaming this ADR to:
```suggestion
# TAD-0005 Add support to run technical tests via AI Verify
```

## Context

The [AI Verify project](https://github.com/aiverify-foundation/aiverify) is set up in a modular way, and the
technical tests is one of the modules. The AI Verify

> team is developing a feature which makes it possible to run the technical tests using an API: a python library with

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
team is developing a feature which makes it possible to run the technical tests using an API: a Python library with
```

a method to run a test and providing the required configuration; for example, which  model and dataset to use and
some test specific configuration.

The result of the test are returned in a JSON format,
which can be processed in any way we please, like writing it to a file or System Card or store it in a database.

### Pros

* We have several technical tests we can use of the shelf, like SHAP, ALE, or Fairness metrics.
* Tests are set up in a generic way using interfaces which allows others, like ourselves, to create and add
 their own plugins.
* Loading models, pipelines and data is done through the AI Verify toolkit, which not only streamlines this process
 but also performs validation and support checks.
* We benefit from new tests being added in the future.

### Cons

* The outcome of an AI Verify test depends on the implementation chosen by the developer. This means

>  there's less control over what data goes into the process report compared to the final result report.

Reviewer 6: > less control over what data goes into the process report compared to the final result respot

This gives me the feeling that we might lose data that could be used in the model, but that is not part of the final result report.

Could you share more about this behavior of the AI Verify test suite?

Author: @ravimeijerrig can you ellaborate on this question?

Reviewer 3: My understanding is that we have limited flexibility in adjusting the content of the process and final result reports, as these forms are set by AI Verify. However, based on what we've seen so far, it appears that these reports meet our requirements.

Reviewer 6: @ravimeijerrig, do you think we should change this con so we explain it a little bit more? I think we should write it down so that we can reproduce what we meant with this con in a couple of months.

Reviewer 3: Hi  @robbertbos, 
 @uittenbroekrobbert and I have found a new way of describing this con. Is this more clear? 
 
 "The outcome of an AI Verify test depends on the implementation chosen by the developer of the plugin. This means there is no control or flexibility over what data (metrics, logs etc.) is included in the output."
